CHAPTER II — Driver Responsibilities
PDF pages 26-30 (printed 16-20)

<<<PDF PAGE 26 | printed page 16>>>
CHAPTER II
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITIES
The privilege to drive carries with it many responsibilities.  You, and only you, are responsible for your
actions.  There are a number of requirements that a driver’s license holder must be aware of in order to
maintain the privilege of driving in West Virginia.
School Attendance for Minors
If your school notifies the DMV that you are not attending or have excessive unexcused absences,
the DMV is shall further restrict your license only for the purpose of work, medical, educational, religious
purposes  until age 18, or until you present a reinstatement authorization form from your school and pay
the reinstatement fee.  You should contact your school or local school board if you have any questions
concerning this law.
How to Refer an Unsafe Driver
If you are concerned about an immediate family member who can no longer safely operate a motor
vehicle, you may write a detailed explanation to the DMV at the address listed below.  You should provide
us with the person’s name, address, date of birth, and driver’s license number, if possible.   Law enforcement
may submit this information if they have had personal observation or contact with an unsafe driver.  You
may also wish to seek the advice of the family member’s personal physician or the physician may submit
information directly to:
Division of Motor Vehicles, Medical Section
PO Box 17030
Charleston, WV 25317
Telephone: (304) 926-3961
Based on the submitted information, the DMV will reexamine the person’s driving skills or ask for
updated medical information from the person’s doctor.  After reexamination, the DMV may issue the person
a restricted driver’s license or revoke his or her driving privilege, not only for the safety of that individual
but for the safety of other motorists.
Re-examination of Drivers
You may be required to take a medical, written, or driving examination if the Commissioner of Motor
Vehicles has good cause to believe you are incompetent or otherwise not qualified to be licensed.
After you have taken the examination, your driver’s license may be suspended or revoked, or you may
be issued a restricted driver’s license. Refusal to submit to this test is grounds for suspension or revocation
of your driver’s license.
Crashes
 CHAPTER II Crashes resulting in injury to, or death of, any person or property damage in excess of $1,000 must be
reported by the quickest means possible (oral or written) within five (5) days to the local police department
if it occurs within a municipality; otherwise, it must be reported to the county sheriff or the nearest WV State
Police office (see WV Code §17C-4-6). If your vehicle was not covered by the required West Virginia liability
insurance on the date of the crash, your motor vehicle registration and driving privilege will be suspended.
Compulsory Insurance
West Virginia law mandates that all motorists driving on the state’s public roads must carry West
Virginia motor vehicle liability insurance.  The minimum amount of coverage, as provided by law is:
]  $25,000 for one (1) death or injury | $50,000 for two (2) deaths or injuries | $25,000 for property damage  |
16

<<<PDF PAGE 27 | printed page 17>>>
When you obtain or renew your vehicle registration, you must provide proof that you have West
Virginia liability insurance on your vehicle and are required to maintain insurance for the full registration
year. If your insurance is DBODFMFE for any reason, you must surrender the vehicle registration plate to
DMV.
In addition, a certificate of insurance or other proof of West Virginia liability insurance, which can
be obtained from your insurance company, must be carried in your vehicle at all times, along with a
valid vehicle registration card. An image displayed on a wireless communication device, as provided in
§17D-2A-4, is also a valid proof of insurance.  In the event of a crash, you must present this
certificate or other proof to any investigating officer. You must also show the certificate at the
time of any vehicle inspection.
 The DMV may conduct a verification of insurance at any time during the registration year. If you are
issued a notice, you will be required to submit proof of coverage.
Failure to provide proof of West Virginia liability insurance will result in the suspension of your
driver’s license as well as your vehicle registration along with reinstatement and/or penalty fees. West
Virginia’s mandatory insurance law allows DMV to directly verify insurance coverage electronically with
insurance companies.
This program, while allowing DMV to verify insurance at the time of any vehicle transaction and
perform ongoing verification to ensure vehicle owners maintain the required insurance while the
registration is current,  provides additional enforcement tools for DMV to track uninsured drivers.  If the
company does not verify your insurance information and you are unable to prove otherwise, you may
be subject to a penalty fee, suspension of your driver’s license, as well as your vehicle registration plate.
If the DMV receives a ticket or crash report indicating that you did not have West Virginia
liability insurance, you may be subject to a suspension of your driver’s license, as well as
suspension of your vehicle registration plate.  Repeat offenses of no insurance will result in
enhancement of the driver’s license suspension period.  Reinstatement of your driver’s license and/or
registration plate will require current proof of West Virginia liability insurance and payment of
mandatory reinstatement fees.
Filing of false or fraudulent insurance information will result in an additional 90-day suspension
of your driver’s license, revocation of your vehicle registration, and possible prosecution that carries a
fine of not more than $1,000 and jail time not to exceed one (1) year.
The Use of Communication Devices While Operating a Motor Vehicle
The use of any electronic communications device while driving a motor vehicle on a public street
or highway is prohibited unless the use is accomplished by hands-free equipment.  Statistics show
that a driver’s concentration drops by 20 – 33 percent when using a wireless communication device.
A hands-free electronic communication device has a feature or function that allows the user to engage
it without the use of either or both hands.
       An electronic communications is defined as a cell phone, personal digital assistant, electronic
device with mobile data access, laptop computer, pager, broadband personal communication device,
2-way messaging device, electronic game, or portable computing device.
Violation of this law includes using an electronic communications device that is not enabled as
hands-free to engage in a call, view or transmit images or data, play games, or compose, send, read,
view, access, browse, transmit, save, or retrieve an e-mail, text message, or other electronic data.
Fines and points assessed against a drivers record based on number of offenses are as follows:
• First offense = $100 fine and zero (0) points
• Second offense = $200 fine and zero (0) points
• Third and subsequent offenses = $300 and three (3) points
17

<<<PDF PAGE 28 | printed page 18>>>
Use of an electronic communications device to report a fire, traffic crash, serious road hazard, or
emergency to the appropriate authorities, or use by a law-enforcement officer, firefighter, emergency
medical technician, paramedic, or the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle in the performance
of their official duties are not violations of this law.  For more details visit www.legis.state.wv.us and search
WV Code §17C-14-15.
Point System
The DMV has a point system to identify and control problem drivers,  maintaining a record of all
violations of traffic laws.
Your record will show the date, nature of the violation, and the court in which you were convicted.
Points have been assigned to various in-state and out-of-state moving traffic violations depending on
the seriousness of the violation.  Repeated convictions may build a point record leading to suspension of
your driving privilege.  Points remain on your driving record for two (2) years from the conviction date.
When you have six (6) points or more on your record, the DMV will send you a letter of caution, urging
you to be careful while driving and obedient of traffic laws.  When you accumulate 12 points on your
record, your driver’s license is subject to suspension.
You may have three (3) points deducted from your record by completing an approved eight (8)
hour defensive driving class.  Motorists are only eligible for this point reduction once every 12 months.
Only specific courses are approved for this point reduction.  If you take a class without approval from the
DMV or take the class prior to the points appearing on your record, you will not be eligible for the point
deduction.  For more information you may contact the DMV at 1-800-642-9066.  The most common point
bearing offenses are listed on page 20.
Driving in Other States
West Virginia is a member of the Driver License Compact.  Traffic violations you receive in other states
will become part of your West Virginia driving record and, if warranted, points will be assessed.  If you
are convicted in other states and the offense is grounds for suspension or revocation, your West Virginia
driver’s license may be suspended or revoked.  Other states may also restrict, suspend, or revoke your
privilege to drive a motor vehicle in those states.
West Virginia is also a member of the Non-Resident Violator Compact.  This allows drivers to accept
traffic citations for certain violations and continue on their way, regardless of whether the driver resides
in that jurisdiction.  Each member state agrees to suspend the driver’s license of its own citizens who fail
to comply with the terms of the traffic violation committed in another state.
Failure to Comply with In-State Citations
State law requires municipal, magistrate, and circuit courts to notify the DMV when you fail to appear
or fail to comply with any type of ticket, court order, or decision, even if it is not a traffic ticket.
The DMV will suspend your driver’s license until you present proof of compliance with the court action
and all penalty fees are paid.  State law also requires the DMV to suspend your driver’s license if you fail
to maintain any child support payment obligations.
Traffic tickets and other types of citations should be handled promptly to avoid possible driver’s license
suspension.
Fraudulent Use of Driver’s Licenses
The information you provide when you apply for your driver’s license or apply for a duplicate driver’s
license must be true and accurate.  It is against the law to provide false information when you apply for
any type of driver’s license.  It is also illegal to use someone else’s license as your own, to permit someone
else to use your driver’s license, to permit someone to use your identity documents to obtain a license,
or to use or display a fictitious license.  The penalty for these offenses is a 90-day suspension.
18

<<<PDF PAGE 29 | printed page 19>>>
Mandatory Driver’s License Revocation
Convictions for certain violations of motor vehicle laws are serious and require the immediate
revocation of your driver’s license.  The DMV must revoke a driver’s license when it receives a notice of
final conviction of any of the following:
t Manslaughter or negligent homicide resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle
t Two (2) or more moving violation convictions as a graduated driver
t Providing false information to the DMV
t Leaving the scene of a crash that results in death or personal injury
t Three (3) convictions of reckless driving in 24 months
t Racing on streets or highways (drag racing)
t Driving while your driver's license is suspended or revoked
t Failure to satisfy a civil judgment against you as a result of your involvement in an automobile crash
t Conviction in this state or in any other state for driving under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances, or drugs
t Failure to pay for gasoline upon second conviction
t Any felony committed using a motor vehicle
Driving While a Driver’s License Is Revoked or Suspended
Revocation and suspension periods vary depending on the offense.  Driving while your driver’s license
is suspended or revoked (non-DUI related) is a serious matter and may cause a 90-day suspension.  The
penalty for driving while your driver’s license is revoked on a DUI is a mandatory minimum jail sentence of
RO?days?to?six?GUH?monthsM??she?law?also?requires?that?your?driving?privilege?be?revoked?for?six?GUH?monthsM
All suspension/revocation transactions and reinstatements must be handled in person at the Division
of Motor Vehicles, 5707 MacCorkle Avenue, SE, Charleston, WV 25317 or by mail through PO Box 17030,
Charleston, WV 25317 or online at go.wv.gov/selfservice.
DMV Online Services
If you need to check the status of your license, obtain the total number of points on your license, or to
check your CDL Medical Certification date, you now have the ability to obtain this information by accessing
the DMV Online Services page at go.wv.gov/selfservice.
Applicants also have the ability to view and purchase a driving record online for a fee of $12.50 and
pay their driver’s license reinstatement fees as well.
19

<<<PDF PAGE 30 | printed page 20>>>
POINT SCALE
OFFENSES POINT OFFENSES POINT
VALUES VALUES
Fleeing from an Officer 8 Driving Too Fast for Conditions 3
Speeding in a School Zone 6 Failure to Maintain Control  of Vehicle 3
Reckless Driving 6 Careless / Hazardous Driving 3
Hit & Run (Leaving the Scene or Failure to Reveal ID) 6 Driving the Wrong Way on a One Way Street 3
Speeding 20mph or More Over the Speed Limit 6 Littering 3
Speeding 15mph to 19mph Over the Speed Limit 5 Improper Lane Violation 3
Speeding 11mph to 14mph Over the Speed Limit 3 Failure to Observe a Safety Zone 3
Failure to Follow a Police Officer’s Instructions 3
3 or More Wireless Communication Device
Violations (Any Combination of Talking and/or  Texting) 3 Driving on the Wrong Side of the Road 3
Passing Violation 3 Following Too Closely 2
Failure to Yield Violation 3 More than 3 Passengers in the Front Seat 2
Failure to Obey Traffic Light 3 Improper Turning 2
Failure to Obey Stop Sign 3 Improper Backing 2
Hazardous Driving 3 Improper Signal or No Signal 2
Driving Left of Center 3 All Other Moving Violations Not Listed Above 2
20
