CHAPTER III — Driving Impaired or Under the Influence
PDF pages 31-33 (printed 21-23)

<<<PDF PAGE 31 | printed page 21>>>
CHAPTER III
DRIVING IMPAIRED OR UNDER THE INFLUENCE
Alcohol mixed with driving is one of the greatest factors in highway crashes.  Studies show that in
recent years about 28% of the fatal crashes in West Virginia involved drivers who had been driving under
the influence of alcohol.  Adults are not the only drivers responsible for this terrible toll; drivers under 21
years of age are involved in alcohol related fatal crashes as well.  Here are some points to remember:
t Alcohol reduces alertness, interferes with judgment, and impairs
vision.
t Alcohol affects a person differently at different times.  Physical and
emotional conditions, other drugs, or even the amount of food in the
stomach can cause alcohol to have a varied effect.
t Physical exercise, black coffee, fresh air, cold showers, and other
ihome remediesw do not effectively help someone sober up.  Time is
the only sobering influence.
t The amount of alcohol in a one-ounce shot of 100-proof whiskey,
six-ounce glass of wine, or a 12-ounce can of beer is the same.
t Our judgment is affected when we drink; thus  decisions made under
the influence of alcohol reflect impeded judgment.
DO NOT DRINK AND DRIVE!
Under Age Drinking and Driving
The legal drinking age in West Virginia is 21 years old.  West Virginia has a zero tolerance law for drivers
under the age of 21 who unwisely and illegally choose to drive with any measurable alcohol in their system.
This means that if you are under the age of 21 and any amount of alcohol is found in your system, you
will lose your driver’s license.
Designated Driver
Having a designated driver is the most reasonable, safe, and practical method to avoid drinking and
driving and/or a DUI violation.
The designated driver is a selected or volunteer companion who will not drink alcohol during the
time they have the responsibility for driving their friend(s) home after a drinking situation.  A designated
driver should always be appointed before the start of any activity involving alcohol.
Knowing Your Limits
 CHAPTER III
In West Virginia, a BAC of more than 0.05 percent and less than 0.08 percent is relevant evidence to
presume that a person is driving while his or her ability to drive is impaired.  If a driver’s BAC is 0.08 percent
or more, they are presumed to be driving under the influence.  Under West Virginia law, your driver’s license
can be revoked if your BAC is less than 0.08 percent.
When a person has more than one (1) drink per hour, the BAC level builds up in his or her body.  For
example, the BAC level actually continues to increase after the last drink at 11:30 p.m. and several hours
later, at 4 a.m., the BAC of that person is still above 0.06 percent.  Persons with this level of alcohol in their
bodies can be arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI).
21

<<<PDF PAGE 32 | printed page 22>>>
Other Drugs
Driving while using drugs is very dangerous and has effects like those of drinking.  Using drugs,
even if prescribed by a physician or bought over the counter, can cause drowsiness, loss of coordination,
hallucinations or total body malfunctions.  The use of alcohol and drugs can be a deadly combination.
Implied Consent and the Chemical Test
If you are arrested for DUI, you are subject to the Implied Consent Law.  As a driver, you are deemed to
have given consent to take the designated Breathalyzer for the purpose of determining alcohol content in
your body.  If you refuse to take the Breathalyzer, your privilege to operate a motor vehicle will be revoked
for a period of one (1) year and up to life.
Many people mistakenly assume that the Implied Consent Law means they will be fined or go to jail
if they are stopped and have alcohol on their breath.  On the contrary, the law is designed to protect the
driver who has not been drinking since the blood alcohol test will provide a medically accepted measure
of alcohol concentration.  The Implied Consent Law safeguards the public from a driver who is intoxicated
by arresting those who refuse to be tested for alcohol content.  Without this law, some drivers might escape
punishment and continue to pose a hazard to the community.
OFFENSES AND CONSEQUENCES
Penalties for Driving Under the Influence
Because the public menace posed by intoxicated drivers is so great, the penalties for violators are severe.
If you are under the age of 18, a DUI offense will result in revocation of your driver’s license until you reach
the age of 18 or for the applicable statutory period of revocation or suspension, whichever is longer and
until all other requirements are met.
Any time your driver’s license is revoked or suspended for a DUI, you must complete a prescribed Safety
and Treatment program before you will be eligible to reinstate your driving privileges.
The chart below shows the penalties and minimum revocation period for each DUI offense.
MINIMUM
OFFENSE '*/&4 JAIL
REVOCATION PERIOD
ZERO Tolerance - Under 21 with ANY Measurable Alcohol $25 - $100 - 30 Days
1st Offense
ZERO Tolerance - Under 21 with ANY Measurable Alcohol $100 - $500 24 Hrs. 60 Days or until
2nd Offense 18th Birthday,
(whichever is greater)
DUI - Alcohol or Drugs w/BAC <.15 or Knowingly Permitting $100 - $500 Up to 6 Mo. 15 Days
1st Offense
DUI - Alcohol or Drugs w/.15 or > $200 - $1000 2 Days - 45 Days
1st Offense 6 Mo.
DUI - With Child Endangerment $200 - $1000 48 Hrs - 60 Days
12 Mo.
DUI - With Body Injury $200 - $1000 24 Hrs. - 60 Days
12 Mo.
DUI - With Serious Bodily Injury $1000 - 2 Yrs. - 60 Days
$3000 PO?xrsM
DUI - With Death t Felony $2000 - 5 Yrs. - Lifetime
$10000 30 Yrs.
%6* $1000 - 6 Mo. - 1 Year
2nd Offense $3000 12 Mo.
%6* $3000 - 1 Yr. - 1 Year
3rd or Subsequent Offense $5000* 3 Yrs.
22

<<<PDF PAGE 33 | printed page 23>>>
How Does a DUI Affect Your Driving Privileges?
When a driver has a DUI or DUI-related event, the law requires that a revocation be placed on that
person’s driving record.  If the event involved alcohol, the driver may be able to participate in the Interlock
Program.  This Program allows a person to drive legally as long as they are operating a vehicle equipped with
an Interlock device.  This device attaches to the ignition system of a vehicle and will prevent an intoxicated
person from starting the car.  This provides a measure of protection for all drivers.  Participation in the
Interlock Program may be an option for some DUI offenders.  For others, it is a mandatory requirement
depending on the type of offense.  If the driver has been revoked for two (2) or more DUI’s or related offenses
within a ten-year period, participation is mandatory.  If a driver submits an application and is approved
for the Interlock Program before the scheduled revocation begins, the individual will not have to serve
a minimum revocation period.  Instead, they can get the device installed immediately and continue to
drive.  However, if the driver fails to apply in time, that person may have to serve a minimum revocation
period and complete the Interlock program.
DROWSY DRIVING IS IMPAIRED DRIVING
Drowsy driving is common on U.S. roads and represents a highly pervasive threat
to public health and transportation safety.  After being awake for 18 hours (time
varies), driving skills are comparable to someone under the influence of drugs or
alcohol. Driving drowsy can decrease your reaction time and increase your crash
risk. You often cannot react in time to apply brakes or steer away from a potential
crash. Crashes related to drowsy driving can be very serious, leading to death or
severe injuries.
If you drive while drowsy, you may become slower to respond to road and traffic
conditions. You may also struggle to process complex information coming from
different places at once or become careless when making driving decisions. When
drowsy, you may have trouble paying attention or actually fall asleep while driving.
Signs That You are Drowsy While Driving Signs That Another Driver May Be Drowsy
• Falling asleep at stop lights; • Head nodding or dropping, if driver is visible;
• Yawning; rubbing eyes; watery eyes; heavy • Drifting out of the travel lane, crossing edge
eyelids; lines or center lines, hitting the rumble strips;
• Difficulty remembering the last few miles driven; • Near miss crashes, especially rear end;
• Missing road signs or exits; • Erratic driving behavior - speeding up/slowing
down, weaving or drifting in lane;
• Unplanned lane changes;
• Rear-ending another vehicle or hitting another
• Head nodding or dropping;
vehicle head-on;
• Driving off the road or hitting the rumble strips.
• Hitting a stationary object.
How to Prevent Drowsy Driving
The best way to reduce drowsiness is to get more sleep. If you are drowsy, don’t drive. Pull over to
a safe area as soon as you can and take a short nap. As little as 10-20 minutes of sleep can make a big
difference. If possible, avoid driving during times you feel sleepy. For many people, this is in the early
morning, during the late afternoon or at night. Let a well-rested person drive. Consider carpooling, using
public transportation, calling a taxi or asking a family member or friend to drive you.
23
