CHAPTER IX — Emergency Situations
PDF pages 80-87 (printed 70-77)

<<<PDF PAGE 80 | printed page 70>>>
CHAPTER IX
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS
What to Check Before Driving
Brakes - Push the pedal down.  It should not go more than halfway to the floor.  The pedal should feel
like it is hitting something hard.  If it feels spongy, air bubbles may be in the brake line.  Push down
and count to 10.  If the pedal keeps going down, you may have a leak in the braking system.  Check
the parking brake by setting it firmly.  If the vehicle moves easily in drive or first gear, the parking brake
needs adjustment.
Leaks - Check under the vehicle frequently for signs of oil, coolant, brake fluid, or transmission leaks.
Under ?the ?Hood ?- ?Check the battery, engine oil, radiator (only when cool), power steering, brake
master cylinder, belts, and hoses.  When checking under the hood, do not smoke or use any flames.
Tires - Crashes due to tire maintenance are preventable, and simple steps can save lives.  Driving an
underinflated or overinflated tires or tires with low tread can lead to safety issues on the road.
Check tire pressure with a gauge monthly:
t Buy a tire pressure gauge if you don't already have one.
t Open your car door, on the inside jamb, you should see a sticker.  Write down or take a picture of the
number that says iPSIw (the measurement for tire pressure).
t Remove the cap from the valve stem and use the tire gage to check the tire pressure (make sure you
check when they are cold).
t Compare the number on the gage with the number you wrote down.  If the number is too high, let some
air out of your tires.  If the number is too low, inflate your tires until the numbers match.
Check tread depth with a penny.
t Hold a penny with Abraham Lincoln's body between your thumb and forefinger.
t Place Lincoln's head first into the deepest-looking groove.  Can you see all of his head?  If yes, your tires
are too worn, don't drive on them, and make sure to get them replaced.
Lights - Check all exterior lights once a month.
Windshield Washers and Wipers - Check wiper blades at least once a year and keep wiper fluid
container full.
Interior Warning Devices - Make sure all warning lights are working properly.
Blowouts
A blowout is a sudden collapse of a tire that can throw the vehicle out of control.  To regain control,
hold tightly to the steering wheel, steer straight ahead, and ease up on the accelerator.  Do not brake
until the vehicle is under control.  Then pull all the way off the road into a safe area.
If it is impossible to get off the road immediately, you should continue driving slowly with your
emergency flashers on.  Under-inflated tires are one of the most common causes of blowouts, so be
sure to check your tires for air often.
70

<<<PDF PAGE 81 | printed page 71>>>
Brake Failure
If your brakes fail:
t Pump the brake pedal quickly.
t Shift to a lower gear and look for a place to slow down and stop off the roadway.  Use your horn and lights to
warn other drivers.
t Use the parking brake, but hold the brake release so you can ease up on the brake if the rear wheels lock and
cause a skid.
Overheating Engine
You can prevent overheating in slow-moving traffic by shifting into neutral and racing your engine
briefly during stops.  This will speed up the fan and water pump.  If the warning light or gauge shows
the engine is overheating, pull off the road and turn the engine off.  Do not remove the radiator cap
until the engine has cooled off.
Skids
If your vehicle begins to skid, stay calm.  Do not use your brakes unless you are in danger of hitting
something.  Concentrate on steering out of trouble.
To steer out of a skid:
t Take your foot off the gas pedal.
t Turn your steering wheel in the direction of the skid. If the rear of your vehicle is skidding to the right, turn to the
right.  Turn left for a skid to the left.  Your vehicle may now start to skid the other way.  Again, turn  your wheels
in the direction you want to go.  Straighten wheels to bring vehicle under control.
Stuck Gas Pedal
If your gas pedal sticks:
t Concentrate on steering and keep your eyes on the road.
t Try to free the pedal with your foot.  If this does not work, push in the clutch or shift into neutral.
t Use your brakes, stop at the nearest safe place, and turn off the ignition.
Wheels Off the Road
If you run off the road you should:
t Grip the steering wheel tightly.
t Stay on the shoulder and ease off the accelerator.
t Brake gently and slow gradually.
t After speed has been reduced, check behind you, as well as ahead for traffic.
t Turn your wheels sharply onto the pavement.
t As soon as your wheels hit the edge of the pavement, turn them the other way to keep your vehicle from heading
across the highway.
71

<<<PDF PAGE 82 | printed page 72>>>
Steering Fails
If you suddenly lose steering control, ease up on the accelerator.  If your vehicle continues to stay
in your lane on the roadway, wait until it slows down, and then gently apply brakes to avoid changing
direction.  If your vehicle starts off the road or toward a pedestrian or another vehicle, apply brakes
quickly, using maximum pressure.
Headlights Fail
If the highway is lighted, get off the roadway onto the shoulder or other available space, as soon
and safely as possible.  If the highway is dark, try your parking lights, your direction signals, or your
emergency flashers and get off the roadway.  If all lights fail, stay on the roadway and slow down enough
to pull off the roadway safely.
Fire in Vehicle
If smoke comes from under the hood, get off the roadway and turn off the ignition.  If no chemical
fire extinguisher is available, use dirt or sand to smother the fire.  Do not use water because burning
gasoline will float on water and spread the fire.  If the fire gets out of control, move at least 100 feet
away from the vehicle since the gas tank may explode.
Vehicle Approaching in Your Lane
If you see a vehicle coming toward you in your lane, move to the right, slow down, then sound your
horn and flash your headlights. Do not turn into the lane the vehicle has left, since the driver may realize
their mistake and turn back into the proper lane.
Stalling on Railroad Tracks
Look both ways for trains.  If a train is coming and your vehicle is stalled on the tracks, get out of the
vehicle and proceed to a safe location.
Oil Pressure Light Comes On
Get the vehicle off the road and immediately turn off the engine.  Check the engine oil level and
add oil if needed.
Dead Battery
If your vehicle has a dead battery, be careful if jump starting it from another vehicle’s battery.  Follow
the rules listed below or consult your owner’s manual.
t Take off the vent caps from both batteries and put a cloth over the open vent wells.
t Turn off lights, heater, air conditioner, and radio.
t Connect the positive post of the dead battery to the positive post of the live battery.
t Connect the negative post of the live battery to the engine block or frame of the vehicle with the dead battery.
Make sure the two (2) vehicles are not touching, then start the vehicle giving the jump.  After letting
it run for a few minutes, start the other vehicle.  Take off the jumper cables in the opposite order and
replace the vent caps.  If battery acid should get on your skin, eyes, or vehicles, wash off immediately
with water.
72

<<<PDF PAGE 83 | printed page 73>>>
Automobile Emergency Kit & First Aid Kit
It is always important to be prepared in case of an emergency.  Weather, crashes, and breakdowns
can all affect whether or not you can continue to drive your vehicle. In a case where you find yourself
stranded, being prepared can make a world of difference.  Below you will find some suggested items for
your automobile emergency and first aid kits.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
The Basic Emergency Kit The Basic First Aid Kit
Battery Powered Radio with Extra Batteries Assorted Safety Pins
Flashlight with Extra Batteries Triangular Bandages
Cell Phone Charger Sterile Gauze Pads
Jumper Cables Self Adhesive Bandages
Signal Flares Scissors
Blanket(s) Tweezers
Critical Prescription Medications Hand Sanitizer
Basic Tool Kit Tylenol / Aspirin / Ibuprofen
Chemical Grade Fire Extinguisher Antacids
Properly Inflated Spare Tire & Jack Latex Gloves
Quick Energy Snacks Sunscreen
Maps of the Area Petroleum Jelly or Lubricant
Compass Mild Soap
Swiss Army Knife / Multi-tool Peroxide
Bottled Water Moistened Towellettes
First Aid
About two million persons are injured in traffic crashes each year.  Many of these injuries eventually
result in death because proper first aid was not given.  The following are general rules for giving first aid:
t Stay calm and do not move the victim unless there is danger of further injury.
t Try to determine how seriously the victim is injured.  Give first aid in the following order:
1. Control bleeding
2. Restore breathing
3. Treat for shock
4. Protect broken bones
*Keep the victim lying down and comfortable.  Administer first aid if you think a delay in emergency care  could
result in death or further injury.
73

<<<PDF PAGE 84 | printed page 74>>>
Good Samaritan Law
No one, including those licensed to practice medicine or dentistry, who in good faith gives emergency
care at the scene of a crash, without pay, is liable for any civil damages as the result of any act or omission
in giving emergency care.
If You are Involved In A Crash
1. Stop immediately.
t Turn off the ignition to prevent the danger of fire.
t Protect the scene by using flares, flagman, or other means to prevent further crashes.
2. Render aid to the injured.
t Do not move the injured unless absolutely necessary.
t Send for necessary aid (ambulance and/or law enforcement).
t Keep spectators away from the injured.
3. If you are involved in a crash resulting in injury or death of any person or property damage
of$1,000 or more, you must notify the nearest law enforcement agency.
4. The following information should be exchanged by persons involved in traffic crashes:
t Name
t Address
t License plate number
t Motor vehicle insurance information
IMPORTANT CRASH RULE
Do not stop at a crash scene unless you are
involved or can render assistance.  Unnecessary
stopping creates additional hazards at the scene.
If you strike an unattended vehicle, try to locate
the owner.  If that is not possible, leave a written
notice containing your name, address, license
plate number, motor vehicle insurance
information, and circumstances of the crash.
74

<<<PDF PAGE 85 | printed page 75>>>
WEST VIRGINIA COURTESY PATROL
PROJECT OVERVIEW
The West Virginia Courtesy Patrol (WVCP), operated by IncidentClear, LLC via the West
Virginia Division of Highways (WVDOH), provides two (2) equally important benefi ts to the state.
First, it reduces the number of individuals on welfare in the state of West Virginia. This is done
through the employment and continuing education of former welfare recipients as Courtesy
Patrol Operators and Dispatchers.  Second, this program benefi ts the traveling public, both using our
interstate highways and corridors for tourism and local commerce.
The WVCP assists stranded motorists, removes hazards from the roadway thereby reducing the
chance of secondary crashes, provides gas or directions, changes a fl at tire, and in general, works to
enhance the safety of our state’s highways.  The Courtesy Patrol works alongside the State Police, 911
Centers, and other emergency and highway personnel to ensure and enhance safety on West Virginia’s
highways.
What should I do if I need assistance?
t Pull off  of the highway as far as possible.
t Keep your doors locked and be aware of who pulls up
behind you.
t The Courtesy Patrol can be reached by dialing 1-800-964-1449.  Store this number on your cell phone in
case of emergency.
t The Courtesy Patrol drivers are in white pickup trucks with easily identifi able blue and gold refl ective Courtesy
Patrol logos and a fl ashing orange bar light on top of the vehicle.
t The drivers have identifi cation badges and wear a refl ective orange or green vest with their blue and gold
trimmed uniform.
t The driver will approach you on the passenger side of the vehicle if at all possible.
75

<<<PDF PAGE 86 | printed page 76>>>

<<<PDF PAGE 87 | printed page 77>>>
UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF WASTE
It is a violation of West Virginia law to litter public or private roadways
or public/private property.
Upon conviction, an individual can be fi ned not less than $50 nor
more than $1,000,  imprisoned in the county jail for not more than
60 days, or sentenced to remove litter from any public or private
roadway?for?a?total?of?not?less?than?RO?hoursM??`?driver?may?also?have?
“points” assessed against their driving record.
RECYCLE
YOUR VEHICLE WASTE!
How does operating a vehicle or truck
endanger the environment?
The following waste products pose
the biggest threats: dirty motor oil, old
tires, antifreeze, and batteries. If dumped
in a lake, the oil from a single oil change
(about a gallon) can ruin a million gallons
of water. When  stockpiled illegally, used
tires collect water, attract mosquitoes,
and become a temptation for arsonists.
Antifreeze is listed as a hazardous
waste by the Environmental Protection
Agency. Old batteries and other hazardous
wastes contain large amounts of lead and
sulfuric acid. The good news is that all of
these “waste” products can be recycled
and reused.
Many auto part retailers and gas
stations with service areas recycle used
oil for free. Leaving used tires with a tire
retailer will ensure proper disposal.
Some auto repair shops will recycle used
antifreeze for a small fee. Battery
retailers are required by law to recycle
old batteries upon request. To learn
more about vehicle and truck waste, call the
West Virginia Office of Environmental
Remediation at 1-(800)-322-5530.
