CHAPTER V — Traffic Control Devices
PDF pages 44-51 (printed 34-41)

<<<PDF PAGE 44 | printed page 34>>>
CHAPTER V
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
The shape and color of signs have meaning.  If fading light, fog, rain, snow, or darkness make it
diffi  cult to see the letters, applicants should still know how to recognize a sign and respond accordingly.
Single Message Shaped Signs
Octagon
These eight-sided signs are reserved for stop signs.  These signs mean you must stop
completely. Give the right-of-way to pedestrians and to all cross traffi  c before moving
again.  At a stop sign, you must stop behind any marked or unmarked crosswalk (joining
sidewalks on opposite sides of the street).  If there are no pavement markings or cross
walks, you must stop before entering an intersection.  Stop at a place where you can see
traffi  c coming from all directions.
Triangle
(upside down)
This shape requires that you yield the right-of-way to cross traffi  c or to merging traffi  c.
Pennant
This sign marks the beginning of a no-passing zone.
Circle
This yellow-and-black sign gives advance warning of a railroad crossing ahead.
Pentagon
This sign warns of a school zone (school grounds and any street/highway abutting the
school ?grounds ?and ?extending ?125 ?feet ?along ?the ?street ?or ?highway ?from ?the ?school
grounds) ahead or marks a school zone crossing.  The maximum speed limit in a school
zone is 15 m.p.h. when children are present or when specifi ed.
 CHAPTER V
Triangle
(right side up)
A right side up triangular sign with a refl ective red border and fl uorescent orange center
identifi es a slow moving vehicle or a vehicle which has made an emergency stop.
34

<<<PDF PAGE 45 | printed page 35>>>
Square & Rectangular Signs
These signs show traffi  c regulations and guide your speed and direction. These signs tell you about
speed limits and other traffi  c laws. Most signs are white with black letters. When the message is very
important, the sign is red with white letters. A red outline with a diagonal bar through it always means
“NO.”
School Zones Business & Residential Open County Highway Interstate
Speed Limit - These signs show the fastest speed you may drive under Lane Directions - These signs are
optimal weather and road conditions. Sometimes the minimum speed posted between highway lanes that are
is also shown.  Advisory speed signs can be found at interstate entrances divided and placed at openings in the
and exit ramps which show the maximum recommended safe speed for dividers where streets intersect with the
driving on the ramp.  These advisory signs are black on yellow. highway.  They are to remind you which
side of the divider you belong on.
No Right Turn?& No Left Turn - This No U-Turn Sign - Wrong Way or Do Not Enter - These signs
sign indicates which direction you cannot This sign means do warn ?you ?that ?traffic ?in ?that ?direction ?is
turn at an intersection.  These signs are not ?turn ?around ?in prohibited.  If you choose a traffi  c lane marked
used when meeting a one way street or the middle of a street with either of these signs you will likely run
in situations where it is unsafe to turn. or an intersection. into another vehicle.
Dual ?Turn Lane - This ?sign ?is One ?Way ?Street - ?This ?sign ?is
posted over a highway lane that used to tell you when a cross
is used only for making left turns street ?has ?traffi  c ?running ?in ?one
from either direction.  Traffi  c from direction only. Usually every
either direction will be using this consecutive block runs in the
lane. Never use a turning lane to opposite direction when there are
overtake and pass other vehicles. one-way streets.
35

<<<PDF PAGE 46 | printed page 36>>>
Diamond & Warning Signs
These  diamond-shaped signs will usually appear without  explanatory words beneath them.  These
signs are yellow with black letters.  They warn of possible danger ahead and may have symbols or written
warnings.  Pedestrian and school warning signs may be yellow-green with black letters.
Curve or sharp turn in the road ahead  - The curve is too
Crossroads or side roads ahead -
sharp to take at the regular highway speed.  An advisory speed
Watch for other vehicles entering or
sign may be attached.
leaving the highway.
Traffi  c ?may ?be ?moving ?into Used ?to ?indicate ?that ?you ?are
your lane. Be ready to change on a two-way road.
your ?speed ?or ?your ?lane ?to
avoid a crash.
To ?warn ?you ?that ?a ?lane ?will
The road ahead has two-way
be ?ending; in this case, the
traffi  c.
right lane.  The symbol would
be ?reversed ?if ?the ?left ?lane ?is
ending.
Warns you of hills where special
This sign is to advise you of an
care must be taken.  Slow down
added lane.
before you start downhill.
Ahead a bridge or underpass This section of highway is more
has low clearance. The  height slippery than other roads when
is shown on the sign. wet. Reduce your speed.
This sign warns you that there This sign warns you that there
is ?a ?crosswalk ?or ?pedestrian is a Traffi  c signal ahead.
path crossing the road. Watch
out ?for, ?and ?yield ?to ?people
walking across the road.
36

<<<PDF PAGE 47 | printed page 37>>>
Construction and Maintenance Signs
Construction and maintenance signs are used to notify
drivers of unusual or potentially dangerous conditions in
or near work areas. Most signs in work areas are diamond-
shaped.  A few signs are rectangular.
Construction and Maintenance Signs and Devices
Various traffi  c control devices are used in construction and
maintenance work areas to direct drivers or pedestrians safely
through the work zone, and to provide for the safety of the
highway workers.
The most commonly used traffi  c control devices are signs,
barricades, drums, cones, tubes, fl ashing arrow panels, and
fl aggers.  Orange is the basic color for these devices.
Channeling Devices
Barricades, vertical panels, drums, cones, and tubes are
*The diagonal stripes on the barricade or vertical panel
the most commonly used devices to alert drivers of unusual or
guide the driver towards the direction to which traffi  c
potentially dangerous conditions in highway and street work
is to pass. Stripes sloping downward to the right
areas and to guide drivers safely through the work zone.  At
mean the driver should bear to the right. Conversely,
night they are often equipped with fl ashing or steady-burn
lights. stripes sloping downward to the left mean bear to
the left.
Flashing Arrow Panels
Large fl ashing or sequencing arrow panels may be used
in work zones both day and night to guide drivers into certain
traffi  c lanes and to inform them that part of the road or street
ahead of them is closed.
SLOWLY
STOP
Proceed
Flaggers
Flaggers are often provided in highway and street work zones to stop, slow, or guide traffi  c safely through
the area.  Flaggers wear orange vests, shirts, or jackets and use red-orange fl ags or stop/slow paddles to direct
traffi  c through work zones.
37

<<<PDF PAGE 48 | printed page 38>>>
Guide Signs
These signs tell you WHERE you are, WHAT road you are on, and HOW to get where you want to go. There
are many diff erent types of guide signs, such as service signs, location signs, route marker information, and
distance signs. Most guide signs are white on green. Motorist services signs are white on blue.   Signs for
parks and public recreation areas are white on brown.
Used on main highways, these signs show distance to places and routes. Found in front of intersections, These signs are found on
these signs show the direction interstates and show you
to cities. where the exit is, as well
as the exit number.
WV & U.S. Route Markers - Are generally black on white.
Interstate markers -  Are red, white, and blue..
Pictured on the right is an
example of an interstate
sign that you may fi nd
when approaching an exit
further ahead.  Aside from
the exit number they may
show the road, location,
attraction, or upcoming
routes and the distance
Interstate Marker U.S. Route Marker WV Route Marker from the exit.
These signs let you know what  These signs are for
amenities are available off designated places Some guide signs have symbols on top
This large park and recreation sign is an
 interstate exits . for travelers to take with a description and/or arrow below.
sample of one you may see.
a break from driving.
BE PREPARED: KNOW YOUR SIGNS
Not all the signs you will see are in this handbook; however, most signs are self-explanatory.  The
warning signs on page 36 are amongst the signs you typically see without identifying text; instead they
often have pictures.
The shapes and colors of signs are a very helpful indicator as to what they are trying to tell you.  Take
notice the next time you are a passenger in a vehicle to all of the signs you see and what they are for.  Being
an observant passenger can help you to become a better driver.
38

<<<PDF PAGE 49 | printed page 39>>>
Railroad Crossing Signs and Signals
Railroad crossing signs can be round or diamond shaped, yellow with black
symbols, or  black letters on white bars in the shape of an X called a crossbuck.
A sign below the crossbuck indicates the number of tracks when there are two
(2)?or more.  Some railroad crossings are equipped with electrical devices to
signal the approach of a train.  These devices consist of various types of signals
such as bells, fl ashers, and automatic gates.  You must yield to all trains.  Failure
to stop when lights are fl ashing, or a barrier is down, will result in a citation.
When there are two (2) or more tracks, you must be alert for a second train
on the other set of tracks.  It is important to note that you should not enter a
railroad crossing until the vehicle ahead has moved far enough ahead that
you can clear the tracks.  Otherwise, you may be trapped on the tracks and
hit by another vehicle or by a train.
Traffi  c Lights
Circular Green / GO - Drivers facing this signal may enter the intersection and go straight
through, turn right, or left, unless, other traffi  c control devices (signs or pavement markings)
prohibit certain movements.  All turns must be made in accordance with accepted right-of-way
rules.  A driver who is facing a circular green indication and wishes to turn left must yield to
oncoming vehicles.
Green Arrow / LEFT TURN -?A green arrow may be shown alone or with other indications.  Drivers
facing the signal may enter the intersection to make the movement shown by the arrow.  When
the green arrow is shown in a left-turn signal, it usually means that opposing traffi  c is stopped.
Steady Circular Yellow -?This means that the green light is ending and will change to red.  You
should only drive through a yellow light if the vehicle clearance is within the intersection.
Yellow Arrow / LEFT TURN - This means that the green arrow is ending and will change to red.
Steady Circular Red / STOP -  Traffi  c facing a steady circular red signal must stop unless making
a movement permitted by a green arrow.  The driver must remain stopped until allowed to proceed
by another indication.  The only exception is to make a permitted turn on red.  A driver may turn right
on red at the intersection of two-way streets, or may turn left on red from a one-way street to another
one-way street.  These turns may be made after yielding to all other traffi  c and pedestrians, and if no
signs are posted to prohibit them.
Steady Red Arrow/ LEFT TURN -?Come to a complete stop before reaching the intersection,
stop line or cross walk for the direction indicated by the arrow.  Remain stopped as long as the
signal is red.
39

<<<PDF PAGE 50 | printed page 40>>>
Intersection Flashers
At certain intersections, fl ashers are installed to supplement or replace STOP signs.
These fl ashers may have circular fl ashing red indications in all directions or may have circular
fl ashing yellow indications for through traffi  c.
Come to a complete
stop and yield to
Drivers facing a circular fl ashing yellow light may proceed through the intersection
all other traffi  c and
with caution. A circular fl ashing red is the same as a stop sign; that is, drivers must come to
QFEFTUSJBOT
a complete stop and yield to all other traffi  c and pedestrians.
When traffi  c control signals are not needed or are out of order, they may be placed in
fl ashing operations. When this happens, they are the same as intersection fl ashers.
Lane Use Control Signals
 Proceed through the
intersection with
caution
Special signals are used to control traffi  c when the direction of a street or certain lane changes during
the day.  These signals indicate how the specifi c lanes may be used.
Green Downward Yellow X: The  lane is Red X: The lane is
Arrow: Traffi  c may about to  be closed or closed or being used
use the lane under its  direction is  about by opposing traffic.
the arrow. to reverse.  Move  out Do not use this lane.
of it as  soon as  you
can.
Crosswalk Signals
Crosswalk signals are traffi  c signals for pedestrians.  If these signals are in place,
pedestrians are to obey them.  These lighted signs are often shown two (2) ways:
Hand Symbol or DON'T WALK- when these appear pedestrians are not to cross the
crosswalk.
Walking Man or WALK - when these appear  pedestrians are safe to cross the street
inside the crosswalk lines.
Be aware of crosswalks at intersections and in school zones. These are indicators
that you are in a high pedestrian traffi  c zone.  Being especially alert for pedestrians
in these places will reduce the risk of crashes.  A blind person who is on foot and
using a guide dog or other service animal, or is carrying a white cane or walking
stick, has the right-of-way on a highway, street, or road regardless of whether they
are in a crosswalk or not.
40

<<<PDF PAGE 51 | printed page 41>>>
Pavement Markings
A
Pavement markings are used like highway signs to warn, regulate,
and inform traffic.
WHITE lines separate traffic lanes moving in the SAME direction.
YELLOW lines separate traffic lanes moving in the OPPOSITE direction.
B
Broken Yellow - Broken yellow lines separate traffic moving in opposite
directions.  If this marking is on your side of the road, you may pass when
it is safe. See Figure A.
Solid Yellow - Solid yellow lines also separate traffic moving in opposite
directions.  If a solid yellow line is on your side of the road, you MUST NOT
PASS. On interstates, one-way streets, or divided four-lane roads, a solid
yellow line will mark the left edge of the pavement. ree?figure?aM
C
Broken White - On roadways which have more than one (1) lane moving in
one direction, traffic lanes are separated by broken white lines.  Broken black
lines are sometimes added to make the white easier to see.  Drive within
these lines and never straddle them, except when changing lanes. See figure C.
Solid White - Solid white lines mark the edge of the pavement.  At night
or in bad weather, they help you stay on the road.  When solid white lines
separate lanes of traffic moving in the same direction, DO NOT CHANGE
LANES. See figure E.
D
Special Purpose or iDiamondw Lanes -  White diamond shapes painted
in the roadway to inform drivers the lane is designated for car pools, bicycles,
or buses.
Center Left-Turn Lanes - These lanes are reserved for left turns from
either direction and are not to be used as through or passing lanes. You can
recognize these lanes by the solid yellow lines nearest the through lanes
and broken lines to the left of them. See figure D.
E
Reversible Lanes - Where traffic volumes are heavy at certain times of the
day, it may be necessary to reverse the traffic flow direction.  Lanes which
reverse are marked on both sides by a double yellow broken line.  This is the
only case where a driver may drive for any distance to the left of a yellow line.
Crosswalk Lines - Many pedestrian crosswalks are marked by solid white
lines. Some crosswalks, especially in residential areas, are not marked.  When
these lines are used, they will run all the way across the pavement.  You will
notice them at intersections and sometimes between intersections.  DO NOT
block a crosswalk with your car. ree?figure?eM
F
Stop Lines - Wide white lines, painted across traffic lanes, mark where you
must stop your vehicle at intersections.  This keeps you out of the way of
pedestrians and cross traffic.  If there are no stop lines or crosswalks, you
must stop your vehicle before you enter the intersections.  You should be
able to see traffic coming from all directions. ree?figure?eM
41
