CHAPTER VIII — Defensive Driving
PDF pages 71-79 (printed 61-69)

<<<PDF PAGE 71 | printed page 61>>>
CHAPTER VIII
DEFENSIVE DRIVING
Defensive driving means being prepared through the practice of good driving habits.  It is just as
easy to develop good driving habits as it is to fall into bad habits.  Safety techniques begin the moment
you step into the vehicle.  Start by forming good habits immediately and use them every trip, whether
it is for just a few blocks or for several hundred miles.
Bad Driving Habits
Bad driving habits result from laziness, impatience, inattention,  arrogance, and aggressiveness.  If
you display any of these bad driving habits, you must first evaluate your behavior and adjust accordingly
to be a safe driver.
Laziness
When you learn to drive, you are taught to look for other traffic before you change lanes, drive away
from the curb, or get out of your vehicle on the traffic side.  Always turn your head and look behind you
for traffic before taking any action. Do not become lazy and look only in the rear view mirror.
    Another related bad habit is failing to signal.  Always signal your intention before turning, changing
lanes, or driving away from the curb.  Allowing the combination of these bad habits to develop could
be the cause of a serious crash.
Impatience
     Regardless of traffic, you must come to
a complete stop at a stop sign or red light,
even when making a right turn.  Pressure from
following vehicles and the absence of cross
traffic may tempt you to only slow down for
a stop sign.
 An impatient driver speeds from stop to
stop, weaves in and out of traffic, and often
tailgates other drivers.  As an impatient driver,
you may be paying close attention to what
you are doing, but you do not realize you are
disrupting traffic and increasing your chances
of causing a crash.
Inattention
As a good driver, you should sit up straight, have a firm grip on the steering wheel, be aware of
where you are, and pay attention to developing traffic problems.
CHAPTER VIII
If you relax, lean back, release your grip on the wheel, and allow your attention to wander, your
vehicle may also wander.
You can easily be identified as an inattentive driver if you drive with one (1) arm out the window,
talk to a passenger, gesture with one (1) hand, or pay little attention to traffic flow.
61

<<<PDF PAGE 72 | printed page 62>>>
Arrogance and Aggressiveness
While the impatient driver is simply in a hurry, the arrogant or aggressive driver is purposely in a
hurry.
As an arrogant or aggressive driver, you compete with your vehicle because it is an extension of
your ego.  You have little or no respect for traffi  c laws or the rights of other drivers or pedestrians.  Don’t
allow yourself to become an arrogant driver or involve yourself in competition with an arrogant driver.
Concentration
Concentration is one of the most important elements of safe driving.  The driver’s seat is no place
for daydreaming,  mental napping, window shopping, scenic viewing, or distracting conversation. Lack
of concentration can result in a driver’s failure to be observant enough to avoid a crash.  Driving an
automobile is a full-time job.
Light Conditions
The amount of natural or artifi cial light available at a given time aff ects your ability to see or be seen.
You can have too much or too little light, which requires an adjustment in your driving to avoid a crash
situation.
For example, driving east during sunrise or west during sunset could result in a condition of too
much natural light.  The proper use of the sun visor,  wearing sunglasses, a reduction of speed, and an
increase in your alertness would be defensive action.  On bright days of summer or winter, sunglasses
may also be advisable to reduce the glare from glass and chrome on other vehicles or the glare from
snow.
At night and on overcast or rainy days, you will need all the light possible to see and be seen properly.
Turn on your headlights.  It is the law and a good idea to turn on your headlights, not just your parking
lights, when it begins to get dark or any time visibility may be impaired (for example, fog, smoke, extreme
cloudiness). If you turn on your headlights a little early, you will help other drivers see you. Keep your
vehicle lighting system clean and in proper repair.
A common term associated with light conditions that cause crashes is “over driving your headlights.”
Over driving your headlights means driving too fast to stop safely within the distance clearly lit by your
headlights.
You may also be aff ected by too much light at night when meeting an oncoming vehicle.  Looking
directly into oncoming headlights causes momentary blindness.  When meeting an oncoming vehicle
at night, slow down, keep to the right of your traffi  c lane, and look well in front of your vehicle at the
right edge of the road.  When meeting another vehicle at night, dim your headlight beams within 500
feet of the other vehicle.  When following  another vehicle, dim your headlights within 200 feet of the
other vehicle.
62

<<<PDF PAGE 73 | printed page 63>>>
Rain
IT IS THE LAW!  Turn on your headlights to increase your visibility.  Turning on your headlights during
periods of rain or reduced visibility is the SAFE thing to do.
Wet Pavement - Rain and wet pavement are dangerous, particularly at the start of a light rain when
a mixture of oil, dirt, and water form a slippery film on the road. This condition makes it harder for
you to keep in contact with the road on curves and increases stopping distance.  Reduce your speed
to adjust to these conditions.
Hydroplaning - Hydroplaning takes place when you are driving on wet pavement and it causes skidding.
At speeds up to 35 mph, most tires will wipe the road surface the same way a windshield wiper cleans
a wind shield.  But as speed increases, tires start to ride like water skis on a film of water.  In a standard
passenger vehicle, partial hydroplaning occurs on the road at about 35 mph.  At 55 mph, tires ride totally on top
of the water.  In a severe rainstorm, tires lose all contact with the road at 55 mph.  When this happens, there is no
friction available to brake, accelerate, or corner.  A gust of wind, road curve, or slight turn can create an
uncontrollable skid.
To reduce the possibility of hydroplaning, you should:
t Slow down during rainstorms, when roads are slushy, or when there is standing water.
t Keep tires properly inflated.  Replace tires when tread wear indicators are visible.
Tires with deep treads allow water to escape from under the tires and can prevent complete
hydroplaning at normal highway speeds.
Flooding
Flooded roadways are extremely hazardous to both drivers and  passengers.  Never attempt to drive
across a flooded roadway.  As little as six (6) inches of water can float some smaller vehicles, while two
(2) feet of water will carry most away.  Once a vehicle floats off the roadway into deeper water, it may
roll uncontrollably while filling with water, trapping the driver and all passengers inside.  In the United
States, motorists trapped inside their vehicles account for nearly one half of all flash flood fatalities.  In
many cases, victims drive directly off the edge of an eroded road without knowing that the road is no
longer there.  Flooded roadways are especially dangerous at night when it is much more difficult to
recognize flooding conditions.
If your vehicle stalls in a flooded roadway, leave it immediately and seek higher ground.  Remember
it is better to be wet than dead.
Snow and Sleet
During the winter, you should have snow tires or chains ready to put on your vehicle.  However,
neither will permit you to drive safely on snow or ice at normal speeds.  If there is snow or ice on the
road, slow down.  Maintain a safe distance between your vehicle and the vehicle ahead of you.  It takes
as much as 12 times the normal distance to stop on snow or ice as it takes to stop on dry pavement.  Be
alert for danger spots.  There may be ice or snow on bridges or overpasses when all other pavement is
clear.
Keep all windows clear of ice and snow.  Keep your windshield wipers and defroster in good working
condition.  Never start driving until all  windows are clear and completely defrosted.
63

<<<PDF PAGE 74 | printed page 64>>>
When you stop or slow down on ice or packed snow, always apply the brakes gently and smoothly.
In a vehicle equipped with anti-lock brakes, you maintain the ability to steer while braking.  However, in
a vehicle without anti-lock brakes you cannot steer unless you pump the brakes, applying and releasing
them several times until you have the vehicle under complete control.  Always be sure to release the
brakes at the first hint the wheels are slipping.
When starting on snow or ice, keep your engine speed low.  Accelerate slowly and smoothly.  If your
vehicle has a manual transmission, let the clutch out slowly and always shift smoothly.  Once you have
started, get the feel of the road by applying the brakes while driving slowly to determine how slippery
the road is.  Adjust your speed to the conditions.
High Winds
Be alert for strong winds which can down power lines and trees and blow debris into your path.
Crosswinds on the road can also be strong enough to force your vehicle into the oncoming traffic lane
or off the roadway.
Fog and Smoke
Fog is an extremely hazardous driving condition.  Smoke from factories, forest fires, and burning
leaves can produce similar conditions.
If you must drive in fog or dense smoke conditions, you should:
t Reduce speed.
t Be alert and prepared for an emergency stop.
t Use your low-beam headlights.
t Use your windshield wipers to remove moisture.
t Pull off to the side of the road and stop.  If the fog or smoke impairs your vision, leave your lights on and also
turn your hazard lights on.
Road Conditions
Road conditions primarily involve the road’s construction.  Road conditions to consider are curves,
hills, pavement width, multiple lanes, road  surfaces, poorly marked or unmarked roads, shoulders, and
drop-offs.
Vehicle Conditions (State Inspection Law)
You cannot safely drive 10 feet or 10 miles in an unsafe vehicle.  West Virginia requires an
inspection of all vehicles every two years to ensure they are in safe driving condition.
Your vehicle must be checked at an inspection station displaying an  official state inspection station
sign.  When your vehicle passes the state inspection, a sticker showing the month and year for  your
next inspection is placed on your  windshield.  It is against the law for you to remove this sticker.
64

<<<PDF PAGE 75 | printed page 65>>>
It is up to you to keep your vehicle in proper driving condition.  Common vehicle defects that cause
crashes are faulty tires, brakes, lights, windshield wipers, defrosters, mufflers and exhaust system, horn,
mirrors, and  unusable seat belts.
Driver Conditions
Make sure you are physically and mentally ready to drive.  Some of the most common driver conditions
affecting the safe operation of a vehicle are fatigue, alcohol, emotional state, and defective eyesight or
hearing.
Fatigue
Fatigue may be caused by lack of sleep or driving too long.  Being tired dulls your mind and slows
your reaction time.
If you are alone and become tired, pull off the road and rest.  If there are other licensed drivers in the
vehicle, change drivers as soon as one driver becomes tired.  If you are on a long trip, take a 10-minute
rest break at least every two (2) hours.  This rest break should be spent outside of the vehicle (walk
around, get a cup of coffee or a soft drink).  Rolling your window down, turning your radio on, or singing
can reduce the monotony of driving.
Emotional States
Sometimes you may experience emotional states of anger, worry, or fear.  You should attempt to
control these emotions and gain self control before driving.
Traffic Conditions
Various elements can affect traffic conditions, including vehicles, pedestrians, and bicyclists.  Also
affecting traffic conditions are the following:
t Time of Day - Rush hours are times when traffic is congested and drivers are in a hurry. Rush-hour traffic is usually inbound to metropolitan
areas between 7 am and 9 am and outbound from these areas between 4 pm and 6 pm.  Rush hours in industrial areas usually occur during changes
in work shifts.
t Day of Week - Rush-hour traffic is heaviest during weekdays.  During weekends you may encounter drivers who are making longer
trips and driving longer hours.
t Time of Year - Summer months are associated with an increase in traffic due to vacation travel.  Holiday weekends also increase
traffic volume.  Watch out for drivers who are tired or in a hurry.  Holiday periods also produce an increase in the number of drunk drivers
on the roadway.
t Surrounding Area - When driving in rural areas, you may encounter slow-moving farm machinery, hazards from stray livestock,
game animals, and motorists driving at higher rates of speed.  When driving in urban areas, you may encounter more pedestrians, bicycles,
intersections, and stop-and-go traffic.
t Types of Vehicles - A defensive driver is always aware of the number of heavy trucks and buses present in traffic. These vehicles can
cause problems in passing, and slow traffic on hills and grades.
65

<<<PDF PAGE 76 | printed page 66>>>
Traffi  c Situations
The following traffi  c situations involve positions another vehicle can take in relation to your vehicle
prior to a crash.
1.?Vehicle Ahead: You must always be aware that the vehicle ahead of you may stop suddenly and without
warning.  If you have not allowed enough following distance, the result may be a crash.  To avoid this
situation, you should stay alert, anticipate that the driver ahead may make a sudden stop and maintain a
safe following distance.
2.?Tailgating Vehicle: The tailgating vehicle behind you is another situation that may cause a crash.  You
have a responsibility to the driver following you to signal whenever you make a change in your driving
pattern.  What you do can aff ect the other driver, especially if you slow down or stop suddenly.
3.?Oncoming Vehicle: The driver of an oncoming vehicle may cross into your lane for many reasons.  The
driver may be asleep, drunk, distracted, recovering from a drop off  the pavement, turning, attempting to
pass  another vehicle or avoiding a pedestrian or other obstacle.  There is also the possibility the driver may
come into your lane while rounding a curve.
4.?Vehicle at an Angle: This situation exists at intersections, driveways, and entrances and exits to parking
lots.  Learn the traffi  c laws and obey signs and signals that control traffi  c in these locations.
5.?Vehicle Passing You: Other drivers will pass you for various reasons, but you should not view being
passed as a challenge.  Many sideswipe and run-off -the-road crashes result from being passed.
To avoid the possibility of a crash with a vehicle passing you, check your rear view mirror frequently, know
what is going on around you, slow down, and keep as close to the right side of the road as possible, making
it easier for the other vehicle to pass.
6.?When You Pass: There is nothing wrong with passing if it is done legally, smoothly, skillfully, and with
consideration.  However, passing puts wear and tear on your vehicle, increases fuel consumption, and can
involve you in a head-on, sideswipe, or run-off -the-road crash.  Exceeding the speed limit when passing is
illegal.  If you have to speed to pass, you probably do not need to pass.
66

<<<PDF PAGE 77 | printed page 67>>>
There are 10 steps to passing another vehicle safely:
1. Keep a safe following distance.
2. Check oncoming traffic.
3. Check the traffic behind your vehicle.
4. Signal before a lane change.
5. Move to the left lane.
6. Accelerate.
7. Warn other drivers by blowing your horn and/or
flashing your lights.
8. Signal lane change.
9. Merge right when you see the front headlights of the vehicle you passed in your rear view mirror.
10. Maintain a safe legal speed.
On interstate highways, you should drive in the right hand lane except when  passing another vehicle.
Safety Equipment
Safety Belts - It is the Law - Everyone in a passenger vehicle must wear a federally approved
safety belt.  It is the responsibility of the driver to ensure that all passengers are buckled into their
safety belts.  The only legal exception is for persons 18 years or older who are riding in the back
seat of a vehicle.  In some cases, an exception to this rule may be issued for medical reasons, and
proof of such a condition may be required of the driver.
Statistics show that wearing safety belts reduces the chances of injury or death resulting from
collisions by 45 to 50 percent.  A safety belt spreads crash forces over the strongest parts of the
body and helps occupants to iride downw a crash.  The lap belt should be worn so that it fits snugly
and comfortably over the lower part of the hips.  This will allow for normal bending of the body.
Shoulder belts, which fit across the shoulder, should be worn with the lap belts for additional
restraint and protection of the upper body.
When safety belts are used properly, they will keep you from being thrown forward or out of the
vehicle.  They also keep you in the proper driving position when driving on bumpy or twisting roads.
Child Safety Seats - West Virginia law states iEvery driver who transports a child under the age of
8 years in a passenger automobile, van or pickup truck other than one operated for hire shall, while
the motor vehicle is in motion and operated on a street or highway of this state, provide for the
protection of the child by properly placing, maintaining and securing the child in a child passenger
safety device system meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards: Provided, That if
a child is under the age of 8 years and at least 4'-9w tall, a safety belt shall be sufficient to meet the
requirements of this section.w
For ?more ?information ?about ?child ?safety ?seats ?and ?safety ?belts, ?please ?call ?the ?Governor's
Highway Safety Program at (304) 926-2509.
67

<<<PDF PAGE 78 | printed page 68>>>
Head ?Restraints ?- ?Head ?restraints ?are ?designed ?to ?reduce ?the ?chance ?of ?whiplash ?injury ?in
rear-end collisions.  If adjustable, they should be positioned to fit against the back of your head,
not your neck.
Anti-Lock Brake System (ABS) - The anti-lock brake system (ABS) is one of the more popular
safety features in new automobiles.  When used properly, the ABS is a safety feature which provides
drivers with the ability to maintain control over their vehicles while coming to an abrupt stop.
The ABS is designed to prevent wheel lockup in the event a motorist must come to a quick stop.
When applying the brake in a vehicle that has an ABS, the driver must continue to steer the vehicle
while pushing hard on the brake.  This requires a new way of thinking for many motorists.  For years,
motorists were taught to pump the brake to avoid wheel lockup and loss of control; however, in a
vehicle equipped with an ABS, pumping the brake will only reduce the system's ability to bring the
vehicle to a quick, safe stop.  In fact, a driver can lose all brake force by pumping ABS brakes.
One misconception concerning the effectiveness of the ABS is that it will stop a vehicle in a much
shorter distance than regular brakes.  This is only partially true.  In fact, in the event of a sudden
stop, the ABS will improve performance by only about 10 percent at best.
Motorists should understand the ABS and all other safety equipment features of the vehicle
they ?are ?operating.  Remember, the ABS is an effective feature to help reduce the risk of wheel
lockup and loss of control in the event of a sudden stop.  However, it does not provide iSuper Brakesw
allowing a vehicle to stop on a dime under all circumstances, and motorists should not take risks
they otherwise would not.
Air Bags - Beginning in 1998, all passenger vehicles were required to have dual airbags and in 1999
all new light trucks were required to have dual air bags.
The purpose of dual air bags is to protect both the driver and front passenger of a vehicle in the
event of a crash.  Over the past several years, air bags have been credited with saving thousands
of lives.  However, drivers and passengers should understand the precautions that must be taken
to allow air bags to be a safety feature and not a danger that could cause fatal or serious injury or
both.  More information on airbags can be found in your vehicle owners manual.
With airbags, the driver and all passengers should have their seat belts secured at all times.  It is
important to note that a majority of those killed by air bags were not wearing their seat belts.
Second, the driver should hold the steering wheel from the side so that their hands and arms are
not between the air bag and their body; the safest placement is right hand at 4 o'clock and left hand
at 8 o'clock.  Both the driver's seat and the front passenger's seat should be slightly tilted backward
with as much distance from the air bag as possible.  This will allow room for the air bag to deploy
before making contact with front-seat occupants.
Risk Reduction for Infants and Toddlers
If a vehicle is equipped with a passenger-side air bag, under NO circumstances should an infant
in a rear-facing safety seat be placed in the front passenger seat.  When there is no other mode of
transportation, several steps must be taken.  First, the child’s safety seat must be a forward-facing seat.
Next, the child must be properly secured in the safety seat.  Finally, the passenger side seat should be
pushed all the way back, to maximize the distance between the child and the air bag.
Again, it is recommended that all children 12 and under should be buckled and placed in the rear
seat.  Younger children should also be correctly seated in a child safety seat.
68

<<<PDF PAGE 79 | printed page 69>>>
8 SIMPLE STEPS TO SAFE AND HAPPY DRIVING
1. Roll `em up! - Keep your vehicle doors locked and the windows up when driving or when parked.
2. No free rides! - No matter how innocent or needy they may appear, hitchhikers can mean bad
news. Avoid them.
3. Know your vehicle! - Familiarize yourself with your vehicle's controls and safety
equipment.
4.?Turn off your wireless communication device, or enable the hands-free function
before driving.
5. Hide your valuables! - Lock purses, wallets, luggage, and valuables in the trunk or glove
compartment.
6. See the light! - Should you become lost, do not pull over on the side of the road to study
your map or directions.  Instead drive to the nearest well-lit, populated, public place such as a
service station or restaurant.  And be sure to lock your vehicle and take the keys with you.
7. Ready, check, go! - Always park in well-lit areas and make sure you have your keys in
hand when approaching your vehicle.  Before entering, be sure to check inside and underneath
your vehicle.
8. Make the call! - In the rare event you feel you are being followed, proceed to a well-lit
populated area and call the police.  In most areas throughout the United States, the police may
be called by dialing 9-1-1.
69
